now this is a rather a tricky thing to
talk about um because i was trying to
use very very simple like the child
could understand to explain what are
really rather subtle theological
political theological concepts like the
notion of sovereignty and
of course
i'll be talking about this a lot more in
other sections of the book
but the idea of clowns it just
fascinated me because
um
it does seem to be the case that there
are a lot of societies and i gave the
examples of tierra del fuego a lot of
aboriginal um first nations of
california this was the case
we have societies where no one is ever
giving anybody orders you don't even
really give orders to children if you
can possibly avoid it
but adults certainly never order each
other around except during rituals now
during rituals gods appear people give
orders but it's not the gods giving
orders
it's the clowns and the clowns are kind
of both the police and the master of
ceremony
and and the clowns at the same time you
have this crazy scenarios where the
clowns are telling people what to do and
then they're telling them intentionally
wrong or they're doing everything
backwards to try to trick people and
then penalizing them for doing it wrong
but i realize that this is kind of
sovereignty in the raw when the power to
give orders and and make up rules and
the clowns not only enforce the rules
they can make up new rules because
they're not bound by the rules
themselves you know so so when that
principle first shows up it's contained
by being made utterly ridiculous and the
california societies for example uh it's
the kind of bums who don't really do
much work and move from town to town and
beg they're the guys who are like
ordinarily clowns and suddenly you make
them king during the ritual
but it's a way of making sure that
nobody was taken seriously has any
chance of getting anywhere near that
kind of arbitrary power
but you could actually see the evolution
especially along the pacific coast of
north america whereby in california you
have these festivals
that go on sometimes for a week up
and
they're very important and they involve
god's coming you need to do it to save
the world
uh you have the clowns running uh things
but the clowns only have this kind of
crazy arbitrary authority
for a few days and they're just going
back to being ordinary people or not
even of the
more problems even whereas among the
pocketal of the northwest coast
uh and other northwest coast people as
well you have a whole winter ritual
season in the last two or three months
and during this period there are
groups of people everybody has one name
in the summer and another game in the
winter uh you switch identities when it
winter ceremonial begins and you uh
everybody in the summer is actually
fighting over who gets access to what
important name who gets to play what
role in the dramas of the winter season
but one of the key roles are what they
call the fool dancers and the fool
dancers are clowns they have giant noses
and they're constantly like getting very
excited about their noses and blowing
their noses on on people and and and um
they're
obsessed with bodily functions and
fluids in general and they're also just
kind of throwing rocks randomly and
messing things up and doing everything
wrong and confusing people but they're
also the cops um so if you do something
wrong they're the ones who penalize you
for example if you accidentally use
somebody's summer name in the winter
when you're not supposed to they'll like
come
throw a rock at you and like penalize
you and you have to pay a martin for
whatever it is uh that people would have
to pay two blankets
money was blankets and so far as they
had money back
in in the northwest coast um so so you
have for three months what seemed to be
a clown police and then that shifts uh
in a lot of
societies of the great plains
um
to having actual
police for for
three four months a year during the
winter ceremonials they have their
ceremony season which also corresponds
to the big buffalo hunt
turns to buffalo and they would like
mobilize on the buffalo but the key
thing is to make sure nobody goes off
too early and messes it up so they would
have
police for three months a year but
otherwise be totally egalitarian
decentralized and um
way they did that is they rotate it
but so sometimes there would be warrior
societies would be a different one every
year would provide the police sometimes
each clan be 24 clans so every 24 years
you get back the first one the one thing
you don't want is the same guy being the
police two years in a row right so
anybody who's police net this year knows
that like anybody they beat up might be
the police next year so it makes people
you know not not take things too far and
be too arbitrary about it but anyway
there are hints here and there that
there is an association between clowning
and ritual policing but it seems to be
something largely forgotten but um there
are hints that
you have emotion from the the the clown
police during the ritual to the clown
police like in the quakutal during the
ritual season
to them turning into an actual police
society which that first rotates and
presumably over time and other studies
becomes more permanent so that's one way
that sovereignty can can be contained
it's contained in time
uh like those
princes of the paleolithic the dwarf
kings and giant kings and hunchbacks and
so forth seem to have only been kings
during the season where everybody gets
together in the winter uh
during the ritual season and then
everybody disperses again
whether they were funny we don't